README.md, before:

# Waveforge

Waveforge is the game I'm developing for [GitHub Game Off 2025](https://itch.io/jam/game-off-2025).

## The concept

Waveforge is a 2D platformer where the player needs to manipulate water waves (and other physical phenomena) to somehow move a rubber duck to the checkpoint in a pixel emulated world with physics simulation (of it's own style, not always realistic though).

## Current status

The codebase for now is a prove of concept. The physics simulation is imcomplete but functional, and the wave manipulation is not fully implemented yet. Launching the game you will get a sandbox to play around with the physics simulation.

- `1`/`2`/`3`/`4`/`5`/`6` keys: change to brush to spawn sand, water, oil and stone wall, wood, copper pixels respectively
- `7` key: change to heat brush to heat up pixels
- Left mouse button: use the brush
- Right mouse button: erase pixels
- Scroll wheel: change brush size
- Space key: pause/unpause the simulation
- `n` key: step one frame when paused

The duck is interactable with the physics simulation now, a checkpoint (for testing purpose) is added at the top right corner. Having the duck reach the checkpoint will print a message to the console, stating that you win, while having the duck fall out of the screen will print a message stating that you lose. However, this is not how the final game will be like, as player won't be able to directly spawn pixels in the final game, but use items (with limited supply) to manipulate the environment instead.

Four music tracks are created and added to the repository, but only "Pixelated Paradise-X" is loaded as background music currently.

## Build instructions

You need to have CMake and a C++23 compatible compiler installed (e.g. GCC 14, Clang 20, MSVC 19.44.35219.0). Then run the following commands in the project root directory:

```bash
# Make sure to enter MSVC environment on Windows
cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo .
cmake --build build --config RelWithDebInfo
```

The direct dependencies will be automatically downloaded and built. Find the executable in `build` directory. The built program can be found at `build/waveforge` (or `build/waveforge.exe` on Windows).

For Linux systems, SFML might requires some additional system libraries. The simplest way is to install SFML via your package manager, so that all those internal dependencies are automatically handled. For example:

```bash
# Debian/Ubuntu
sudo apt install libsfml-dev

# Arch Linux and dirivatives
sudo pacman -S sfml
```

You can also install those dependencies manually if you prefer not to install SFML system-wide. Please refer to SFML's official documentation for more details.

## Implementation notes

This is quite a straightforward C++ project with simple structure:

- `include/wforge`: header files
- `src`: source files
- `assets`: asset files including music and sound effects
- `CMakeLists.txt`: CMake build script (all in one file for simplicity)

The physics simulation is written from scratch. We use SFML for graphics rendering and audio playback. [proxy](https://github.com/microsoft/proxy) is used to for polymorphism (i.e. fat pointers) instead of traditional virtual functions for simplier and unified lifetime management.

The physics simulation is inspired by Noita's falling everything engine (but we are doing somewhat better at fluid simulation here), which is basically a cellular automaton with some rules for different pixel classes. Performance is not optimal yet, but it's acceptable for now (in Release mode).

The fluid simulation process is devided into two phases: the global update phase and the local update phase. In the global update phase, we abstract the fluid pixels into fluid blocks and build a graph structure representing the connectivity between those blocks. Then the network flow algorithm (Dinic implementation) is used to calculate the fluid distribution among those blocks. In the local update phase, some classic cellular automaton rules are applied to each fluid pixel to simulate local interactions (e.g. water flowing downwards due to gravity). The global update phase is implemented in `fluidflow.cpp` and the local update phase is implemented in `fluids.cpp`.

A thermal simulation system is also implemented, allowing pixels to exchange heat with adjacent pixels and change state when certain temperature thresholds are reached (e.g. oil igniting when heated enough). The heat exchange process is simple (linearly averaging respesting to thermal conductivity as weight), but it works fine for our purpose. The thermal simulation is implemented in `thermal.cpp`.

The current `main.cpp` (mainly used for testing) is quite messy (partly because it's mostly written by Github Copilot). Instead of drawing bunches of rectangles for each pixel, the rendering system dynamically create a texture representing the pixel world and render it all at once for better performance.

## Team Members

- Code: [fang_erj](https://github.com/szdytom)
- Music: stevvven
- Game Play: zurry

Look for more team members in the future! Contact me with email szdytom[at]qq.com or discord @fang_erj if you are interested.

Commit message:

add item for player to manipulate the world
Signed-off-by: szdytom <szdytom@qq.com>

README.md, after:

# Waveforge

Waveforge is the game I'm developing for [GitHub Game Off 2025](https://itch.io/jam/game-off-2025).

## The concept

Waveforge is a 2D platformer where the player needs to manipulate water waves (and other physical phenomena) to somehow move a rubber duck to the checkpoint in a pixel emulated world with physics simulation (of it's own style, not always realistic though).

For more details about the game physics system, please refer to [Physics System](docs/physics-system.md).

## Current status

A sample level is loaded and can be played. The physics system is mostly implemented. Main screen and level selection screen are not implemented yet.

Four music tracks are created and added to the repository, but only "Pixelated Paradise-X" is loaded as background music currently.

## Build instructions

You need to have CMake and a C++23 compatible compiler installed (e.g. GCC 14, Clang 20, MSVC 19.44.35219.0). Then run the following commands in the project root directory:

```bash
# Make sure to enter MSVC environment on Windows
cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo .
cmake --build build --config RelWithDebInfo
```

The direct dependencies will be automatically downloaded and built. Find the executable in `build` directory. The built program can be found at `build/waveforge` (or `build/waveforge.exe` on Windows).

For Linux systems, SFML might requires some additional system libraries. The simplest way is to install SFML via your package manager, so that all those internal dependencies are automatically handled. For example:

```bash
# Debian/Ubuntu
sudo apt install libsfml-dev

# Arch Linux and dirivatives
sudo pacman -S sfml
```

You can also install those dependencies manually if you prefer not to install SFML system-wide. Please refer to SFML's official documentation for more details.

## Implementation notes

This is quite a straightforward C++ project with simple structure:

- `include/wforge`: header files
- `src`: source files
- `assets`: asset files including music and sound effects
- `CMakeLists.txt`: CMake build script (all in one file for simplicity)

The physics simulation is written from scratch. We use SFML for graphics rendering and audio playback. [proxy](https://github.com/microsoft/proxy) is used to for polymorphism (i.e. fat pointers) instead of traditional virtual functions for simplier and unified lifetime management.

The physics simulation is inspired by Noita's falling everything engine (but we are doing somewhat better at fluid simulation here), which is basically a cellular automaton with some rules for different pixel classes. Performance is not optimal yet, but it's acceptable for now (in Release mode).

The fluid simulation process is devided into two phases: the global update phase and the local update phase. In the global update phase, we abstract the fluid pixels into fluid blocks and build a graph structure representing the connectivity between those blocks. Then the network flow algorithm (Dinic implementation) is used to calculate the fluid distribution among those blocks. In the local update phase, some classic cellular automaton rules are applied to each fluid pixel to simulate local interactions (e.g. water flowing downwards due to gravity). The global update phase is implemented in `fluidflow.cpp` and the local update phase is implemented in `fluids.cpp`.

A thermal simulation system is also implemented, allowing pixels to exchange heat with adjacent pixels and change state when certain temperature thresholds are reached (e.g. oil igniting when heated enough). The heat exchange process is simple (linearly averaging respesting to thermal conductivity as weight), but it works fine for our purpose. The thermal simulation is implemented in `thermal.cpp`.

The current `main.cpp` (mainly used for testing) is quite messy (partly because it's mostly written by Github Copilot). Instead of drawing bunches of rectangles for each pixel, the rendering system dynamically create a texture representing the pixel world and render it all at once for better performance.

## Team Members

- Code: [fang_erj](https://github.com/szdytom)
- Music: stevvven
- Game Play: zurry

Look for more team members in the future! Contact me with email szdytom[at]qq.com or discord @fang_erj if you are interested.
